# Void

What can the blue humanities learn from deep mapping? First and foremost, it provides an opportunity to enthusiastically embrace the inherent contradictions of the ocean. Secondly, it allows enthusiastic adoption of non-linear movements through material, a Kamau Brathwaite tidalectic rather than a Socratic dialectic. It allows for a vision of the sea as home and not alien, seas of islands not islands in the sea, to quote Epeli Hau’ofa.[^1] It reminds us that claims to absolute authority and neat conclusion are delusions, that the quantification and utilitarian demarcation of the blue world is a delusion of human control. It reminds us both of why humans are right to fear water, and why they are simultaneously right to love it. It reminds us that the world is a cluster of fierce problems and contradictions that cannot be solved, only explored.

Deep mapping is essential to the study of the blue humanities because it is a methodology as _memento mori_. It reminds the researcher that their knowledge is imperfect and incomplete, but that this is a source of excitement rather than frustration. By drawing together strands of deep narrative and telling dynamic and ever-changing stories of them, the deep mapper is embracing and celebrating the possibilities of embracing chaotic knowledge, and the stories that bring a larger sense of meaning in unprecedented times. We exist in a time of crisis, and crises exist at the convergence of many turbulent eddies and flows. Many things are possible in a crisis, and a deep map allows these webs of potential cause and effect to be navigated. By following the paths of disaster, recuperation, ruin and reparation into the deep, we gain the ability to interrogate its plural meaning.

The biggest challenge of deep mapping, readily applicable to the blue humanities more broadly, is to play with the epistemic horror of depth. A sufficiently large body of knowledge is indistinguishable from a void, for any individual foray into its depths is akin to a submariner descending through endless crushing depths in a fragile submersible shell. There is a reason why we make these journeys: they are powerful, informative, cumulative and a positive contribution to knowledge of what exists in the depths. There are so many things that could not be known about the depths without that profoundly confrontational contestation between light and depth, a breathable bubble of air and an airless chthonic void, between the conditions needed to support the human body and the crushing pressure of the deeps. In short, there is a reason why the abyss is a primordial master trope of horror, why we fear it, and why we battle to resist it. 

Likewise, there is a reason why we try and tell stories from datasets that are beyond individual human comprehension. We fear the more-than-knowable, the vast excess of data that it is possible to collect. We craft algorithms and deep learning AI models to try and make sense of these troves of data. It is increasingly impossible to read everything, know everything, or even be aware of new developments in a world of dizzying speed. And so we push back the depths with claims to positivist authority, posthumanist creeds stating that AI will save us like some kind of messiah, or by burning ever-larger amounts of energy to process and interpret what is received but now known.

[^1]: Hau’ofa, Epeli, ‘Our Sea of Islands’, 1994 <[http://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/12960](http://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/12960)> [accessed 25 February 2014]; Hau’ofa, Epeli, ‘The Ocean in Us’, 1998 <[http://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/13234](http://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/13234)> [accessed 25 February 2014]
