# Radical

The traditions of radical geography serve us well as the exploitation of the deep ocean unfolds. Deep mapping is poised to embrace the drive to question and interrogate rather than simply measure space and place and the technologies that mediate. A radical oceanography seeks to look through that stated goals of deep see interactions - be they trawling, exploration, remote sensing or mining ambitions - as well as those atop the water - shipping, offshore oil and gas, imagined floating communities, attempts to clean up oceanic pollution. 

No unexamined assumption of measurement, mapping or technological intervention can be allowed to remain unexamined. As Phillip Steinberg has put it, it is exceedingly difficult to tell a story of the ocean without somehow fetishising it or reducing it to medium rather than message:

>How does one tell a sea story? Or, to restate the question: How does one put the sea in the centre of a story without fetishizing it in its alterity, or reducing it to a metaphor, or diminishing it to an environment that provides resources, or bypassing it as an intervening space in the middle? How does one bring the ocean to the foreground without elevating its materiality and its affordances – its opacity, its fluidity, its repetitive churn, its dangerous unpredictability, its emotive power, its embedded memories – into something that they are not.[^1]

The romance of the ocean can prove a dangerous distraction from its its political ecology. Making the space below the surface into a muse alone lessens its message and attenuates the urgency of its political precarity. Deep mapping would suggest that it is possible to expose facets of this romance, the stories engendered by water, but also juxtapose them with jarring fragments of inconvenient political and social reality.

One particular trope of deep sea sensing and investigation that cannot be permitted to remain critically unexamined is that of scientific progress. The allure and romance of the deep sea and those who have explored it remains and clings to popular perception. The world of Jacques Cousteau is not so far removed from our own in popular culture. We spend a great deal of time as media consumers being asked to marvel at the unexamined mysteries and strange life of the deep ocean, to wonder what secrets it might hold. These urges cut both ways: they are a wellspring for passion and an urge to conserve, but also a screen for ever more invasive modes of exploration. Just as social media influencers have monetised wander lust and degrade the very places they romanticise, so too can an uncritical and capitalise romance with the ocean serve to destroy it.

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Radical)

[^1]: Phillip Steinberg (2025). Thinking from multiple oceans: historical and elemental lineages and futures of ocean geography(s). _Social & Cultural Geography_, 1–21, here p.1. [https://doi.org/10.1080/14649365.2025.2476507](https://doi.org/10.1080/14649365.2025.2476507)
