.ve-style ../custom.css

# Commentary

The oceans themselves are a medium of commentary *par excellence*, a repository of unassimilated content vaster than interpretation that must be read with and against the grain, glossed and made manifest for the reader. The eddies and flows within the ocean remind us that a continuum - light to dark, low pressure to high pressure, sun to thermal vent - is never uniform. Pieces of story - ideas, material objects, lifeforms, toxins and histories - float in the currents, rising and falling as they follow the patterns of the waters. The medium of commentary creates a shifting and changing relationship between an unstable text and an expansive paratext. By commenting on itself, this text will a dialogue described by Nicola Masciandaro in the inaugural issue of the *Glossator* journal:

>[Commentary is a] mysterious intersection between a reading subject and a textual object. This dialogue concerns especially the ambivalent creativity of commentary, its operation as a complex formal space defined by decidedly mixed characteristics and impulses: exposure, critique, renewal, freedom, possession, constraint, superfluity, belatedness, excess, irrelevance, openness . . .[^1]

The format of this book has been designed and imagined to echo these bubbling churning interstices. Its paragraphs float in a loosely tethered arrangement, like the bobbing platforms of a artificial and unstable atoll. Some nodes are content, others commentary on that content. As with all deep maps, the point at which text ends and commentary begins is unclear - boundary objects dot the assemblage in abundance. The jump from text to comment is never clean, just as the historian's categorisation of primary and secondary sources is never neat. When the context of reading changes, commentary becomes text and that which is commented upon becomes ancillary. The parts exist as a floating assemblage, much as a deep map does. The commentary is what draws the pieces together, if only for a time:

>One way of conceptualizing a deep map is to think of it as an assemblage. That term, assemblage, conjures the perspective of the philosophers Giles Deleuze and Felix Guattari. For them, “territory” is always fluid and dynamic, constituted by the shifting interrelationships of multiple heterogeneous components. As Brent Adkins remarks in his commentary on their ideas, territory is the site of “the interconnection of wildly diverse things.” Those things ceaselessly connect, disconnect, and reconnect in new ways, so that territory is ever shifting: territorialization, deterritorialization, and reterritorialization. A map of territory.[^2]

.ve-media https://iiif.europeana.eu/presentation/1021/https___www_searchculture_gr_aggregator_edm_Collections_OTE_000147_mt_013452/manifest width=60% center

In many ways, it it irrelevant who is commenting upon whom. Data can be metadata and data in different contexts - a commentary upon a book or an object is both a description of that object and a historical or literary source, for example. Historians will be familiar with this conundrum through the endless interplay of primary and secondary sources, one minute describing a source, the next the source itself. The text and the context dance and play, swirling in eddies and flows of hermeneutic interactions. It is not possible to write a book about chaos, but commenting on the meaning of a yawning void is a playful and engaging opportunity. Mediating this dance with experimental publishing technologies is more intriguing still.

The structure of this book is necessary, a path of signifiers for the reader to follow. When descending into the depths, a cable is required in order to return. A little piece of the surface world must be the descender's constant companion. The human body, and indeed the human mind was not meant to exist beyond a world of air and light. The fragility of bathymetric descent is compiled by the fragility of the tether. One might recall the early deep sea diving suits, bulky cumbersome armour against the airless membrane and attached to a mother vessel by an umbilicus of rancid and stale pumped oxygen. It is important to note that human relationships built between the surface world and the depths are ever fragile. They grow in sophistication - and in recent decades, in automation and remote operation capacity - but are tenuous. Follow the path, but do not mistake it for completion or safety or destiny.

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Commentary)

[^1]: Nicola Masciandaro, 'Introduction', *Glossator*, Volume 1, Fall 2009, II
[^2]: John Corrigan. ‘The Inexactitude of Science: Deep Mapping and Scholarship’. In _Making Deep Maps_. Routledge, 2021, 162-174, here p. 162.