# Puzzles

We live in a world of extremes in which the capacity of humanity—cognition, computation, imagination—are insufficient to capture or even understand the forces at work out of and beyond sight. The reason that depth is an important concept for both the methodology of deep mapping and that of blue humanities is that it reveals a conflict between ambition and impossibility. It is desirable to know and understand as much as possible, especially when a large, complex and ever-salient force such as water is concerned. However, it is also impossible to do so, for it is ever-changing, ever-deep, ever-dark and ever-complex.  Taking individual components of the aquatic world system in isolation - be it a horizontally defined region or hydro-social node, or the vertically defined spectrum from surface to depths - cannot lead to anything but failure of hermeneutics. Only a complex world-system that includes more knowledges, spaces, depths and perspectives than it is possible to essay can capture the fierce problematics and promise of an unknowable ocean. 

The oceans were never our to know, and it is a master trope of the blue humanities - back to Steve Mentz and his discussions of the 'new thalassology' that European thought is not at home in the ocean, but that it is also possible to embrace a sea of islands that is home, that is knowable, that is complex and ever-changing and yet part of the social sphere.[^1] When exploring the role of the Mediterranean in a new thalassology, Horden and Purcell ask asks how  '...the seas that are its objects join up to constitute a changing global history'[^2] This history evades temporal and geographic boundaries, embracing an agential assemblage of actors and influences that cannot but full known. At its core, seeing the ocean not as a series of regions but as an ever-changing conglomeration of ever-changing global interconnections requires a vision of both surface and depth that explored what Horden and Purcell describe as a jigsaw puzzle in which every piece is unique - and in which each region plays a unique role, and yet in which the pieces form to create a whole that is greater and more co-dependent than its parts might suggest. Understanding the complexity and excess of the puzzle is part of the history-writing process. However, unlike a conventional puzzle, the ocean has no epistemic 'edges'. We will never find the borders of the puzzle. It has no edge pieces of corners to orient the mind, only more pieces. In a world of subsumed cause and effect and climate processes that exceed human apprehension, this complex and interconnected thalassological vision has never been more essential. Attempting to put together the pieces grants knowledge, but there will always be more pieces.

It is possible - and indeed eternally likely - that all knowledges of waters sit atop a vast unknowability, a lacuna, a place that is not for humans to know. Total knowledge is not possible where it is sought, and not desirable where it is not. Depth requires superabundance and excess of meaning beyond comprehension: it is the magic and the terror of water. The writing and research process ties puzzle piece to puzzle piece, hinting at a rich thalassology of interconnections and agential interactions. The fact that the process does not and cannot end, that the puzzle cannot be complete, does not detract from the worthiness of the puzzling. An incomplete picture, an impression, is better than no picture at all. But the process is more akin to bricolage than to solving. 

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Puzzles)

[^1]: Steven Mentz, ‘Toward a Blue Cultural Studies: The Sea, Maritime Culture, and Early Modern English Literature’, _Literature Compass_, 6.5 (2009), pp. 997–1013, doi:[10.1111/j.1741-4113.2009.00655.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-4113.2009.00655.x)
[^2]: Peregrine Horden, and Nicholas Purcell, ‘The Mediterranean and “the New Thalassology”’, _The American Historical Review_, 111.3 (2006), pp. 722–40, here p. 739, doi:[10.1086/ahr.111.3.722](https://doi.org/10.1086/ahr.111.3.722)