This book is a commentary on its own contents, and on the tensions and contradictions inherent to its subject matter. It takes a looser structure because the relationship between a range of thematic axes and nodes is equally loose. Likewise, a deep map comments upon itself and its many vicissitudes, drawing attention to the raw edges, lacunae, chaotic churnings and spots of darkness within its uneasy depths. A deep map should roil, it should wait, it should hunger and it should never reveal itself. It lays in wait, a vast excess. It is chaos, unformed and unassimilated. Strands of meaning and strings of exploration are drawn from the foam, lines drawn on the unstable surface of something that defies permanency. 

The reason why the text of the book is styled as commentary rather than argumentation is because it moves and shifts with the inconsistencies of its subject matter. Like Kamau Brathwaite's tidalectics, it ebbs and flows without the dialectic ownership asserted by a classical scholarly monograph.[^1] It has always been my goal to write a chimeric book that viciously tears at itself, a set of heads that bicker and contest, never fully resolving themselves. Blue humanities books and volumes display an intense passion for ambiguity and the ever-changing fluidity of their subject matter. They revel in the plurality of the themes possible within the field - if it can be named as such - and refuse to lay a neat deductive journey from point A to point B. Their scholarship worries at the mass of assumptions too large to handle in any single piece of work, and often derive from perspectives that reveal the artificiality and coloniality underpinning their genesis. In this tradition, the blue humanities are well matched to deep mapping. Both are invested in the dissolution of convenient consensus. Of simplicity. Of smooth waters.

A churning and a ceaseless motion characterises the ocean - currents both vertical and horizontal that underpin life on Earth. Without motion, there is no humanity. Without homeostatic motion, there is no cycle. And yet, accelerating change threatens to increase the force of some motions while quieting others. In a world without the gulf stream, humanity cannot survive. In a world with rapid ocean rise, storm surges and coastal erosion, the ceaseless agitation of blue space worries at the foundations of human life. The same is true of deep mapping. Motion is intellectual vigour, variety, juxtaposition and radical recombination. The creative bricolage of giving a range of knowledge types and ecomedia objects equal epistemic audition is a form of creative destruction. And yet without commentary and a narrative voice, it threatens to overwhelm. An unassimilated roiling mass of excess shot through with veins and bubbles of contradiction, social agonism, lacunae and internal inconsistency without a narrative is an adiagetic soup. It exists whether or not we wish it to, but withdraws and resists hermeneutics. An imperfect vehicle - termed bathymetric reading here - is required to delve the deep map, but is is fragile and prone to error. 

#KamauBrathwaite #Tidalectics #DMBH #Commentary #Instability #DeepMaps #BlueHumanities #Commentary #Depth #Motion #Tides #DMBHBook #ParaBlock #CH1 

[^1]: *Tidalectics: Imagining an Oceanic Worldview through Art and Science*. Edited by Stefanie Hessler (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2018)