Humans are fundamentally unsuited for the pressures of the ocean depths. Only an elaborate bathymetric prosthesis allows humans to descend. In an extreme antecedent beloved of medievalists, the romances and legends of Alexander the Great popular in the middle ages tell stories of the king descending to the depths in a diving bell, showing his mastery of the deep and not of land alone. Even the greatest and most iconic ruler imaginable in the medieval literary imagination, on par with Rome herself, could not survive and dominate the depths without a protective shell. Technological mediation is inherent to any experience of the deep. Without sufficiently advanced technology, the ocean bed would remain a complete mystery, or participate in human life solely through the strange creatures washed up on the shores. It would remain a part of human socio-natural interactions, but through mythology, storytelling, spirituality and folklore. The technologies in question ranges from the ability to traverse and gaze beneath the surface of the oceans - swimming, diving, canoes or ships - to the ability to send robotic probes and submersibles to its deepest extremes. In every case, the human body requires mediation.

When the technology fails, a long history of chilling deaths awaits. A catalogue of asphyxiation, barotrauma, the bends, suffocation or simply death by crushing. A claustrophobic nightmare always lurking in the back of the mind of every aquanaut. Flesh is weak. Only membranes and barriers are strong, and yet they are only as strong as the materials that they are made from, the umbilicals that deliver them oxygen, the continuous supply of power to the pumps that fill them with life. Monstrous storms that wreck ships, swallow coastal settlements, sweep away buildings and swallow human lives. In a time of climate crisis, the gnawing attrition of coastal erosion, the worsening of storms, the pollution, heating and acidification of oceans.

There is a reason why it is eternally attractive to send machines into irradiated dead zones like Chernobyl's twisted reactor or conflict zones where a bomb might lurk or a hidden sniper might fire. Human life is precarious, and flesh is vulnerable. Automated extensions of human activity are fragile in their own way, but replaceable. As semi-autonomous ocean rovers become cheaper and more effective, more of the ocean will open up to them. As machine eyes become keener and the data-driven insights they glean more accurate, we will see more of the ocean. Does this make the flesh stronger? 

#CH2 #DMBH #Flesh #Pressure #Immersion