Hope is tenuous in the dark. What wishes can be born beyond light, beyond human habitation, in the pressure and the abyssal distance from light? The ever-present crush that breaks bodies, implodes fragile submersible shells, that swallows sense-making. Why should a deep map, a blue humanities, of oceanic vertical planes be hopeful? Hope requires a radical rejection of many things: fear, lack of fear, vision, disinterest in vision, knowledge, rejection of knowledge. The contradictions grow and cluster together, bobbing on eddies and flows of fancy, madness, intuition and imagination. Emotions run deep like currents, cutting the absence with sparks of presence.

There is a wish in the humility required to admit the limitations of commentary, its possibilities, its extent. A wish for a world in which there are absences and gaps, in which the wonder of lacunae remains. We cling on to the hope that if all cannot be known, if mapping exceeds comprehension, then a chorus of voices can drown out the tidy master narratives that weaken humanity and make it complacent. We are best when we hope and look to a void with bated breath coupled with curiosity. There is audacity in the gloaming of a limited light source pushes back feebly against a wall of emptiness.

To hope, we must descend from the surface-encrusting anxieties of looking down. We must enter the abyss. To hope is to aspire to meaning, to cleave from the Western terror of something beyond the senses and beyond science. Only as the noise of surface dwelling speculating fades can the deep map grow with a profusion of night-dark crushing revelations, down with the whale falls and deep see vents and strange life that dwells in a sparkling dance of luminescence. Down below in the reaches of the trenches and crevices where bathymetric reading senses what could be, and where the plum line reaches full extent. Beyond knowing a thing and beyond attempts at familiarity or knowledge or intimacy. In the accreted spaces where the toxins and microplastics and acidification and heat and wrecks cluster, hidden from human eyes and yet reoccuring, hyperobjects on an eternal return.

#CH1 #DMBH #Hope #Absence #Presence