The monster waits in the abyss, in potential. The hackneyed myth that medieval maps contained the legend of 'hic sunt dracones' or 'here be dragons' is untrue, and yet monsters still appear in the margins. Headless and single footed men, dog headed peoples, serpents, giants. In the depths of the ocean, krakens and leviathans and wonders await. Oceanography has only revealed more of how marvelous and alien the depths of the ocean and the unknown places may be, how outside human life and thriving. Literature, film, and popular culture are replete with genre pieces that draw on this master trope of fear. Ludovica Montecchio has used the model of Medusa, multifaceted metaphor for a multifaceted and plural abyssal vision:

> Medusa’s dual stare will be a metaphor for the current deep sea explorations. Beautiful and delicate habitats and biodiversity are petrified and immobilized, isolated in time and places as pieces of resources that are disposable and ready to be extracted. This is the stony truth the Ocean floor is facing today, and in order to make sense of it, we need to look in the eyes of its truth. In the contemporary turmoil of acceleration, Medusa, daughter of deep oceanic parents, has forgotten her Chthonic roots. Her eyes see the truth, but by seeing it she petrifies it. Her gaze is what allows her to see the world, but prevents her from interacting with it. Yet, stones can be turned around in one’s hands.[^1]

The monster gnaws at us, promising that something will reach out in the dark, grab us, drag us under. In our minds the monster could be anything, it is the thing that shows us who we are by shaping the contours of what we fear. And yet, who is 'we'? Who created the monster that has populated the dark margins, lacunae and depths of the terraqueous world? Where does terror become possibility?  The monster was birthed from the same place as the dog-headed people and giants. The leviathan represents a Western cultural terror, that the unfamiliar contains wonders and dangers in equal measure. Maps have always been contours of our hopes and fears, tracing the boundaries of the familiar and yet tempting and terrifying with their absences. What is missing is what is to be feared, in potential.  Deep maps even more so, for their scope and ambition and refusal to adhere to restrictions or orderly delimitations torment the quantitatively-minded. Just as Isaac Newton feared the vanity of tinkering on the shore when a great excess yawned, but the idea embedded in the quote as a popular culture phenomenon also explains much of the paradox inherent in deep blue knowledge. It has been understood as challenge: keep looking for the ocean because there is always more to learn. Without the god-fearing underpinning of the quote - a warning against vanity - the positivist quest has become a search for the entire ocean of knowledge, an anxiety that the unfamiliar lurks within this ocean and that humanity was not meant to apprehend it, and an optimism that this anxiety can be overcome. What is missing? Acceptance.

This book does not discount the possibility of learning more and of improving our scientific practices and sensing technologies. We cannot retreat from knowledge. The book simply asks a different question. What if we attempt to grow from the delving of the abyss, by befriending the monster, rather than by attempting to defeat it? We live in a world where it has never been more crucial to be comfortable with partial knowledge, to understand that we must place a limit on what once can know. Strive for more, but be comfortable with a reach that exceeds our grasp. We must learn to embrace the radical nature of this accommodation. This question opens up many more. Can we become more by both knowing and knowing that we know nothing? Is dread at excess a forgotten dimension of the ocean's story and that of humanity? Can we creatively essay excess, merging science and the arts to experience more and gain more agency by embracing the Leviathan?

#CH1 #Abyss #Leviathan #Parablock #Lurking #Monstrous #Depth

[^1]: Ludovica Montecchio,. ‘Body, Metaphor, Medusa: An Ecocritical Oceanic Exploration beyond Ocean Literacy’ (MA Dissertation: Università Ca' Foscari Venezia, 2024), [http://dspace.unive.it/handle/10579/26309](http://dspace.unive.it/handle/10579/26309 See also Stifjell, Celina. ‘She-Monsters and Sea Changes: Imagining Submersion in Speculative Feminist Fiction’. Doctoral thesis, NTNU, 2024. [https://ntnuopen.ntnu.no/ntnu-xmlui/handle/11250/3115470](https://ntnuopen.ntnu.no/ntnu-xmlui/handle/11250/3115470) See also Celina Stifjell. ‘She-Monsters and Sea Changes: Imagining Submersion in Speculative Feminist Fiction’. Doctoral thesis, NTNU, 2024. [https://ntnuopen.ntnu.no/ntnu-xmlui/handle/11250/3115470](https://ntnuopen.ntnu.no/ntnu-xmlui/handle/11250/3115470).