As the economy hungers for minerals and polymetals to feed its endless growth, capitalists need look no further than the ocean. Why mine asteroids and go to space when a large proportion of the Earth's surface remains obscured by a veil of aqueous mystery, an integument that science has thus far failed to consistently navigate. A new generation of strip mining autonomous drones and resource sucking pipelines could soon denude the mineral rich patches of the ocean of all life. Why would those who can engineer a solution such as this care any more for the deep ocean than they did for what existed before the strip mine or the monoculture?

The positivist myth of neoliberal capitalism tells us that it ideas of change that shape the technologies to achieve them, that there is no material precondition or consequence to progress. In preparation, the eyes turned to the deep in the spirit of exploration and scientific discovery now assess resources to be exploited and ignore externalities too trivial to account for. Handmaidens of this process such as new remote sensing drones, deep learning and automation create the risk that humanity will destroy the ocean bed even sooner than the slower death of warming and acidification, that it will be an already denuded ocean bed that will become too warm and acidic for life as we know it to survive.

There is something broadly totemic about the idea of mining the ocean, a symbol for the moribund self-destruction of human life on Earth. At some point, only the submerged ocean floor remains to be converted into capital. Without the dreams of leaving Earth to mine the solar system's metal-rich asteroids, oceanic mining becomes the next frontier of exploitation. Better still, the negative externalities of this process are hidden from terrestrial life,  somewhere that the damage can be buried along with the bodies.

#Mining #Exploitation #DMBH #CH2 #Sensing