Narratives that sweep and soar are simpler. Hope that spans and encompasses is reassuring. They are ambitious and their scope is visibly comprehensive. We can admire the terrain they cover. Breadth is beloved of intellectual inquiry because it can be appreciated in its entirety. We can look at its individual components and discover how they go together, put together the pieces of the puzzle and admire the eloquence of their combination. Depth, on the other hand, is something we value but fear. Profundity is not a totality, but a sense that something has dimensions and implications beyond what we can apprehend. That if we continue to gaze into it, we will see more and more. We will experience the sublime, a mixture of fear and awe, at the scope of profound implications. It is there in the language. 

Together, they form axes on the dimensions of knowledge. We wish for broadness in some studies, narrowness in others, we wish for shallowness in some contexts, depths in others. A deep map is designed to be narrow and deep, an aperture of seemingly humble proportions that can potentially hold an infinite granular volume of ideas and materials. But the idea that depth can go on, and on, and on, and never end, is unsettling. Soundings are made. We drop a rock and listen for the sound, we lowed a weight and hope that it hits rock bottom. Within the act is a subsumed fear that the weight will never bottom out. Or worse, we run out of depth and are perpetually uncertain whether a failure of equipment or an endless abyss is the explanation.

Why is our fear important? Why does it matter that we are anxious about what waits beneath? Why should we embrace an affect that derives from ignorance and not knowledge? A positivist scientific narrative might consider the active courting of unknowing as mysticism or zealotry, or more charitably as a faith-based activity that is not directly part of the process of discovery. But we fear what we cannot see, and we imagine the monsters of the world in the spaces that are colonised by the imagination. The places that are greeted with fear or hostility are culturally contingent: western thinkers might fear the ocean whereas islanded cultures embrace what Epeli Hau'ofa termed the 'sea of islands' connecting rather than dividing. However, no matter *what* is feared, there is always *something* to fear.[^1] 

Depth evokes a primordial fear. It is in many ways the oldest fear. The cosmogony of many faiths is predicated on a formless and lightless void, something that existed before the world and awaits to claim it. It is hard to decide whether the fear of nothing or the fear of something is greater. This fear of the abyss yawning before us permeates epistemology at every level. We can learn to cope with it, to embrace it as a positive facet of the human condition, to use it as a stimulus. But we can never escape it. We can sense and detect more and more of the world every day and revel in this progress, but there will always be more darkness. This chapter sits on the membrane between knowing and unknowing and considers what it is to fear depth.

#CH1 #ParaBlock #Depth #Interpretation #RemoteSensing #Fear #DeepMaps 

[^1]: Hau’ofa, Epeli. ‘Our Sea of Islands’, 1994. [http://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/12960](http://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/12960); Hau’ofa, Epeli. ‘The Ocean in Us’, 1998. [http://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/13234](http://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/13234).