The ocean, as Derek Walcott put it, is a grey vault of memory, and of trauma.[^1] As in Walcott's formulation, much has been swallowed by water - slavery, the legacies of colonialism, the many lives that crossed the waters in search of a Western notion of history and destiny. It swallowed painful history and memory, but the evidence of a slow subtle violence remains. It acts as a heatsink that has temporarily obscured the extent of global temperature rise, but the evidence of past misdeeds return to plague the surface. As it warms and acidifies, the ocean becomes both more problematic and intrusive to humanity, but also less mysterious. The silence of the archive is ended as the depths return and revisit historic trauma and remind us that nothing is ever truly an externality of life on land. 

Conversely, the depths are intruded upon by the far above surface, as the enduring petrochemicals and waste of the surface make their way ever downwards, entering the food chain and carpeting the ocean floor. Nothing was ever truly gone, merely obscured. The more can be seen, the more an ecological crime scene is revealed. The ocean is not a magic trick: matter that enters the depths remains there. The ocean floor is not hidden or other but in the imagination: it is simply invisible and distant. The darkness of depth has encouraged the (largely Western) conceit that an alien deep bears no relationship to the sunlit surface waters that support a more familiar aquatic world. The Anthropocene offers a reckoning, for the touch of human industry becomes ever more apparent as more becomes visible via remote sensing and bathymetry. As the view of the deep becomes clearer, its effect on the surface is confrontationally uncovered, becoming ever more inescapable. We live in an era when the naive belief that the ocean's capacity to conceal our mistakes is infinite has been shown to be a harmful fiction. The more that is visible of the ocean, the more of humanity's folly is laid bare.

What will we do when the depths return our detritus? When the rising waters spill over our defences and more of Earth's surface becomes a besieged polderland that lives a precarious existence below sea level? What do we do when the deep becomes less deep? Some mysteries will become plain in the light of day, and yet more will always emerge. As the slow violence of crisis unfolds, how will we make sense of a newly surfaced depth? Realizing that seeing more is not knowing more and that essaying is a messy form of revelation is a core conceit of this book. Its text bubbles with internal contradictions and chaotic juxtapositions such as those that humanity increasingly faces. Western thinking has ensconced epistemes behind a barrier that holds back the weight of consequences, that creates an impossible and unsustainable idyll free from the vagaries of depth. When the barriers are breached, these consequences will all come home. Why not preempt a post-catastrophic reckoning by plunging into the strange and alienating depths and knowing what it is to cede control? Experiments in deep and blue humanities require dabbling in the poetics of impossibility and excess.

Creative harnessing of chaos allows a form of pluriversal ontological design to occur, merging disparate elements that overtly contradict one another into a messy whole, incomplete and yet excessive. Equally creative methods for bathymetric descents into the depths of this excess cuts through mediating structures of legal, governmental, techno-scientific and social nicety. It reveals that there is a wider spectrum of affects, experiences, knowledges and agencies at work than can be known of explained. It revels in the chaos. It stays with the trouble of oceanic being, to paraphrase Donna Haraway:

> Staying with the trouble requires making oddkin; that is, we require each other in unexpected collaborations and combinations, in hot compost piles. We become-with each other or not at all. That kind of material semiotics is always situated, someplace and not noplace, entangled and worldly. Alone, in our separate kinds of expertise and experience, we know both too much and too little, and so we succumb to despair or to hope, and neither is a sensible attitude. Neither despair nor hope is tuned to the senses, to mindful matter, to material semiotics, to mortal earthlings in thick copresence.[^2]

#Depth #DMBH #Surface #Concealment #Revealing #DMBHBook 

[^1]: Derek Walcott, *The Sea is History*. See Gardner, Rachel Gardner, ‘“The Sea Is History” by Derek Walcott – Poetry And/As Translation’ <[https://scholarblogs.emory.edu/complit203/2017/03/03/lotus/](https://scholarblogs.emory.edu/complit203/2017/03/03/lotus/)> [accessed 3 August 2018]
[^2]: Donna J. Haraway, Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene (Duke University Press, 2016), p. 3.
