There is a trend within more quantitatively minded humanities and social science disciplines such as archaeology to question why deep mapping is not available to answer research questions in a more 'systematic' manner. This is an understandable instinct, and makes sense if you believe that deep mapping is a method in the same way that a particular historical GIS or qualitative data analysis method is a method. This fundamentally misunderstands what a deep map is. The depth of deep mapping comes not from its scale or diversity alone, but also from its ungovernability. 

If this book encourages the reader to do one thing, it is to embrace and channel the chaos of deep maps. There is a reason why, in this author's opinion, the best deep maps are made by artists and those that might be more accurately described as research-driven creatives than scholars. Researchers that become deep mappers should see themselves as creatives first and researchers second. 

This is a challenge for the social sciences in particular, who have a culture of mass influence through in-text citation. Deep mapping intrigues systematically-minded scholars, for it is clearly useful. And yes, it could certainly be made more systematic and consistent, something that could be learned from a handbook of spatial or digital humanities methods. But should this be done? Would a systematic deep map truly be deep? It is my strong assertion here that applying methodological ordering to deep maps is like draining an ocean - yes you will see more terrain, but the depth, the profundity, is gone. 

My suggestion here is that we have the tools to create order within the tools used to deep map that does not order the method itself. This book, for example, uses simple but effective tools based on years of meticulous coding and design work. It stands on the shoulders of systematic approaches. It is an experiment that in some respects has had to reject scholarship in favour of mystery, reject rigour in favour of plurality and reject neatness and cohesion in favour of creativity. 

Like an artist, I have chosen to play with my materials. It is bricolage, a collection of found objects formed into assemblage. These materials were once precisely engineered, perhaps for flexibility or durability or to be flame retardant or to insulate. Their original material context is transformed through the alchemy of composition into something rich and strange. My suggestion for those who are seeking to systematise deep maps is that one can create *a system* for deep maps that suits one's research, but that creating one's own toolkit, assembling one's materials, is inherently a creative process. There is room for an ordered methodology within deep maps, but every tool kit should be assembled by its user from scratch. What one person might consider to be a building material, to extend the metaphor, you might see as skin, or bone, or terrain. You choose the context based on affordances that emerge from the deep map.

#DMBH #CH1 #Methodology #Archaeology #DeepMaps