We often interpret the word 'deep' in deep map to mean thick, rich, and full of content. But a deep map is not a plenum, a full thing. It contains a vast emptiness created in the very capaciousness of its scope. It is possible to fall between the crack of knowledge even in the smallest place, to learn that it is not possible to know everything about anything. It is impressionistic, a bricolage, a hungry maw ingesting context, a bricolage, a chaos, a scrap book. It is a flurry of motion and colour. And yet it can never be complete, and so must always be empty. It is like the jar of marbles used in many a demonstration to show that nothing is truly full. If you pour sand inside the marbles it will be less empty, but gaps still exist between the grains of sand. It, like everything, is mostly nothing. We are mostly nothing. There is a yawning emptiness at the heart of meaning, and we flail within it.

The spirit of this absence lurks at the heart of one of the most storied tales of the scientific method. Regardless of whether is is something said by the famous physicist and natural philosopher or a convenient attribution after his death, Newton is forever associated with the sentiment that he was a child playing on the shore as the great ocean of truth waiting undiscovered. This seems at first stance a story of wonder, but reading it against the grain can equally present a sense of unease and horror. The quote is said to have been uttered by Newton in the years close to his death, a convenient expression of the trifles discovered during his life's work compared to the vastness of truth. In the quote that inspired the passage, from Milton's *Paradise Regained*, we see a vision of one learned in books but shallow in spirit who trifles with endless reading when the truth of God exists elsewhere and beyond. Perhaps in this sense of superabundance, and omniscience, we can see a hint of the epistemic challenge posed by depth. Any sufficiently deep object, be it a more-than-human Christian deity or a more-than-human life world, will always elude the learned efforts of even the most outstanding scientists, philosophers and scholars. It is an excess that be definition exceeds. Discomfort with ignorance is an essential trait for those seeking to gaze into depths.[^1]  

This idea is deeply challenging to a positivist vision of human progress. An impossible excess is chastening, and it is tempting to fall into a series of coping strategies rather than accepting that some things cannot be known. In this, the deep map is a hermeneutic educator *par excellence*. It is a tool of research, discovery, and learning. It gets bigger, becoming more and more as it grows. And yet, it can never be a twin of reality except in its superfluity. The deep map is a trick because its richness ensures that every journey into its depths results in a unique chain of encounters, and yet out there, beyond view, is the vastness of excess. The nothingness is not actually nothing, as Timothy Morton puts it, but an excess of something. A hyperobject beyond the scale of human understanding. Deep mapping may seen comfortable and personal and it is because it causes the reader and the mapper to delve the variety of socio-cultural and socio-natural relationships possible in a place. It is intimate. And yet like any assemblage containing the human and non-human, it is alien and cold. We should fear a deep map, because it reminds us that no matter the scale of content placed within it, a map is never full. Staying with this trouble and following it allows us to learn something about our instinct to map and to experience depth.

There is a great deal that can be known—quantitatively speaking—about water, and yet these conclusions clash with very human conceptual limits such as imagining the ocean as finite, imagining the slow creep of sea levels rising, seeing beyond the shifting baseline of the present to see change beyond human temporalities. Marine science and oceanography can tell us that a phenomenon exists on a large scale and change our way of imagining the world and acting withing it, but it still struggles with the more-than-human interactions, second by second, that are behind the oceans and other complex participants in the global hydrological cycle. Grasping the inscrutable lives of hyper objects is beyond the remit of visualisation and data analyses alone. It is a story that must be lived and navigated in all of its complexity. Deep maps accept that the bottom of the deeps are unknown, and that we exist in the shallows of knowledge. It generates a chaos that alarms and reassures because it is true to life. It is not a master narrative or even a collection of narratives, but a machine for emulating the incoherence of the world as experienced through human epistemology.

#CH1 #ParaBlock #Depth #Interpretation #RemoteSensing #Fear #DeepMaps 

[^1]: See Hans Asenbaum, Amanda Machin, Jean-Paul Gagnon, Diana Leong, Melissa Orlie, and James Louis Smith. ‘The Nonhuman Condition: Radical Democracy through New Materialist Lenses’. _Contemporary Political Theory_, 8 June 2023. [https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-023-00635-3](https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-023-00635-3).