# Hijacking

There is a politics to the methodology of deep mapping. Showing that a place can be captured incompletely, impressionistically, eclectically and meaningfully without ever-larger quantitative datasets is a powerful statement in the world of big data. To know something up close and incompletely, and to revel in this anti-authoritarian incompleteness, has become radical. To insist that every individual's reading of a deep map is personal and that the notion of completeness is laughable is empowering. The alternative is shallow and convenient narratives of completeness that obscure the chaos within. Deep mapping and the ocean depths are agents of chaos, long lurking at the boundaries of consciousness. An expression of that which is submerged but now known. An excess that waits.

Capitalism has sought to make fear safe. It has recuperated the ocean and normalised it within a globalist and extractivist worldview. In the terminology of the Situationist International, *recuperation* occurs when a radical idea is twisted, co-opted, annexed and commodified by capitalism.[^1] Deep maps, likewise, and the notion of radical explanation that they encapsulate, can be seen to have been recuperated into a glib catch word of cute method for engagement, making its radical tendencies safe and easy to include in commodified academic research and a range of public engagement projects. This does allow the methodology to become more accessible, but at the cost of becoming less impactful. 

We could say that the notion of an unknowable depth within the blue spaces of the world is also increasingly becoming recuperated. As remote sensing and data-driven mapping and exploration disenchants the ocean and the effects of climate crisis and human pollution robs them of their diversity, we make depth romantic but not frightening, despite the inherent danger of the ocean. The ocean, likewise, can temporarily be made glib and aesthetic, useful and unproblematic: scenery, source of wonder, inspiration, frontier, resource, mine for minerals, farm for edible marine life. 

The answer to both forms of capitalist recuperation is to *détourn* - to hijack - them. Deep maps must be dangerous and confusing, intimidating and incomplete, personal and ever-changing. This book strenuously asserts that we cannot tame either blue humanities or deep maps. They cannot be made safe, they cannot be defused, they cannot be made playthings of the market. We need the tools that they offer or, rather, the *lack of tools*  that they offer. We are woefully unprepared for the epistemic challenges of our times, and this limitation is in part because we are human, and thus limited. Embracing methods for creative delving within these waters shows that life has meaning and a life-world need not account for all things. We must re-enchant the world with healthy fear and respect after centuries of degradation. We must learn to play and to explore but to fear as well.

To understand that there is an affective palate of emotions surrounding the depth of deep mapping itself explains much of the anxiety of the present. In many ways, we experience modernity in the same way that a deep map depicts space: subjectively, with small jagged outcrops of meaning jutting from a vast roiling mass of uncertainty and primordial chaos. We are in an age of epistemic overextension, in which we claim to know more than we do and are expected to absorb more than we can. We are saturated, the excess in meaning sheeting off us and pooling at our feet. It threatens to drown us as it rises. To be alive is to be afraid, and to be alive today is to be afraid of one's own epistemic shortcomings. 

Deep mapping teaches us to stay with and to probe the edges of our lack of understanding like a tongue that cannot help but touch an ulcer: it provokes distress but also a strange satisfaction. We watch the sheer spectacle of our ignorance in the age of hyperobjective challenges, struggling to know and yet always falling short. Guy Debord wrote that what was once lived is not viewed as an image as if on a screen; we passively identify with the spectacle of life rather than participating in it. To fail to know and be disheartened is to surrender agency, and yet deep mapping *never* surrenders agency. It has agency: a deep map is an agential assemblage of human and non-human actants as well as representation. It requires agency to be read: one cannot passively consume a deep map, and it demands interaction. A true deep map is radically meaningless or absurd at times, confronting the user with its incompleteness and protean meaning in a mode of art. It is a hijacking, a *détournement*, which creates a spectacle in order to disrupt the flow of a spectacle.

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Hijacking)

[^1]: Guy Debord, and Ken Knabb (trans), _Society of the Spectacle_ (AKPress, 2005) 
 