# Commonplace

It was once common to make gatherings of material, bound together into a unified codex for convenience. In the Middle Ages, the miscellany was a common format - an amalgam of pen trials, owners, kings, stories, theological tracts and scientific or medical knowledge. The components of the book might be different reproductions by different scribes gathered at different times, and collected together. Later, formats such as a family bible or commonplace book, printed and mass produced but adapted, would carry the recipes, remedies, practices and genealogies of a family through the generations. When William Least Heat-Moon structured *PrairyErth*, he interspersed chapters of Canvas lore and thematic content with chapters named after the kind of books that Europeans might have carried with them into the great plains. For Heat-Moon, the commonplace was a string of source citations from contemporary books, spread over several pages, each building up an impressionistic picture of space, place, people and practices. It is the goal of this book to function as a kind of deep mapping and deep oceanic commonplace, using a loose array of micro-chapters and a bricolage of tapestry-like tables of contents to combine what is needful, strange, in accordance, in contradiction, timely and timeless in a single place. It is a patchwork quilt of content, a resurfacing of the regurgitated depths of the digital ocean, of the accumulated lore of the internet and the resources built to preserve and transmit popular culture in web archives, publications and written formats. 

.ve-media https://iiif.europeana.eu/presentation/9200579/eqg8d6ng/manifest width=80% center

The pathways of memory run deep through this material, and the ordering logic of the deep provides a path. And yet, within it all, it should be possible to sense the crowded in chaos of the deep - its histories, its problematics, its extreme precarity, its exploitation. There is chaos here, the abyssal, but also beauty, chains of life and wonders of food web, genetics, interdependence, heat zones and energy moving through a system. It is not 'scientific' or 'objective': it is a scrap book. It is commonplace knowledge for a time when future readers might pick up the book and wonder at what was important in this moment. The book will age and its content will become a snapshot in time, but it is not one, but countless, messages in bottles sent to the future with no knowledge of the recipient.

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Commonplace)