.ve-style ../custom.css

# Mined

As the economy hungers for minerals and polymetals to feed its endless growth, capitalists need look no further than the ocean. Why mine asteroids and go to space when a large proportion of the Earth's surface remains obscured by a veil of aqueous mystery, an integument that science has thus far failed to consistently navigate. A new generation of strip mining autonomous drones and resource sucking pipelines could soon denude the mineral rich patches of the ocean of all life. Why would those who can engineer a solution such as this care any more for the deep ocean than they did for what existed before the strip mine or the monoculture?

The positivist myth of neoliberal capitalism tells us that it ideas of change that shape the technologies to achieve them, that there is no material precondition or consequence to progress. In preparation, the eyes turned to the deep in the spirit of exploration and scientific discovery now assess resources to be exploited and ignore externalities too trivial to account for. Handmaidens of this process such as new remote sensing drones, deep learning and automation create the risk that humanity will destroy the ocean bed even sooner than the slower death of warming and acidification, that it will be an already denuded ocean bed that will become too warm and acidic for life as we know it to survive.

There is something broadly totemic about the idea of mining the ocean, a symbol for the moribund self-destruction of human life on Earth. At some point, only the submerged ocean floor remains to be converted into capital. Without the dreams of leaving Earth to mine the solar system's metal-rich asteroids, oceanic mining becomes the next frontier of exploitation. Better still, the negative externalities of this process are hidden from terrestrial life,  somewhere that the damage can be buried along with the bodies.

>The concept of “Oceanian Sovereignty” suggests therefore that governance or management action should be perceived, conceived, and engaged as a common enactment between partners which may overlap with but not be defined by the national or international governance framework whose agents and agencies are seeking to enact DSM. One of the most delicate issues confronting any governance or management context is the establishment of who can determine environmental and ecological futures and make decisions (Mawyer and Jacka, 2018).[^1]

Deep sea mining may appear at first to be a 'victimless crime', the opening up of access to a previously untouchable space filled with riches. The *terra nullius* narrative of colonial imagination continues to play out, desecrating both the patrimony of island dwelling and coastal peoples but also the biodiversity and life on which human life depends. There is a need for nuance in the relationship between those with a stake in oceanic life, and a reciprocal agency that recognises a spectrum of agencies from human to non-human. As the ocean bed is uncovered and demystified and more land is revealed beneath, it is inevitable within capitalism that what can be exploited will be exploited. Sovereignty takes on new depth in this context, literally and figuratively. What previously recognised the rights to the surface and upper depths - navigation, fishing, legal jurisdiction becomes all the more crucial when the full vertical reality of the deep see manifests itself.

[^1]: Tilot, Virginie C. et al., The Concept of Oceanian Sovereignty in the Context of Deep Sea Mining in the Pacific Region, Front. Mar. Sci., 2021, [https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2021.756072](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2021.756072)

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Mined)