# Violence

A great deal of slow violence hides beneath the facade of the ocean's surface. It is populated with the voices of the drowned and murdered, the trafficked and enslaved. As Jonathan Howard has termed it, the excesses of exploration, colonisation and the scientific positivist mindset have their watery origins in large-scale encounters with the deep sea.[^1] If humanity is to overcome its troubled relationship with the ocean in a time of rapid climate change, it must first come to terms with this fact. The Black Atlantic is an important starting point for the reconfiguration of the depths from a space of fear into something nourishing and deeper, both in terms of human engagement and in terms of human affective understanding.[^2] As I have previously argued, the retrieval of memories and unhealed traumas through a descent into an archive of body of literature requires understanding that the non-human agency and voices of water are fundamentally communications of violence, erased or forgotten but ever-present in the sediment of cultural memory.[^3] As Pugh and Chandler have argued, the epistemic lens of modernity, critiqued elsewhere in this book through scientific positivism and extractive capitalism, is fundamentally the creator and maintainer of the material conditions of inequality:

>For the abyssal analytic, the modern episteme is not understood as a product of abstract or ‘reductionist’ thinking which today needs to be ‘grounded’, ‘adjusted’ or ‘corrected’. The critique of modernity is not that it fails to understand complexity or contingency or relation; that it commits what is often called ‘epistemological violence’ (Rekret 2018, 101). Modernist understandings are not merely a problem of thought or of approach, but a problem ingrained within the materiality of the world. Modernist understandings are understood to be integral to the real material and ongoing reproduction of structural inequity, dispossession, coloniality and racial capitalism.[^4]

Elsewhere in this book, we have seen examples of the ways in which materialist and scientific assumptions about the way the world works, and fears and nightmares arising from these assumptions, are the foundation of many injustices and slow violence. We must, as Pugh and Chandler continue, embrace this inseparability:

>Key for approaches which enable us to draw out the abyssal analytic, is that ‘the human’ and ‘the world’ are conceptually and materially inseparable from the violent histories of chattel slavery, coloniality and racial capitalism. For abyssal approaches, this world is not over, nor can some pre-existing or pure world, without the grounding violence of chattel slavery and coloniality, be salvaged or redeemed.[^5]

Fundamentally, this approach requires a fundamental shift in thinking. The crisis experienced by the Global North was centuries in the making elsewhere in the world. The violence of the present manifested through the degradation and exploitation of the deep ocean, as well as its disenchantment and reduction in ontological status, is the next step in a very long and very slow violence inflicted by the powerful. Only by recognising that there is more at stake than a few mistakes of consumption to be corrected can an equitable solution emerge.

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Violence)

[^1]: Jonathan Howard (2022). Swim your ground: Towards a black and blue humanities. _Atlantic Studies_, _20_(2), 308–330. https://doi.org/10.1080/14788810.2021.2015944
[^2]: Elizabeth DeLoughrey (2022). Kinship in the abyss: submerging with _The Deep_. _Atlantic Studies_, _20_(2), 348–360. https://doi.org/10.1080/14788810.2022.2080462
[^3]: James L. Smith, Anxieties of Access: Remembering as a Lake. _Environmental Humanities_ 1 May 2021; 13 (1): 245–263. doi: [https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-8867296](https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-8867296)
[^4]: Jonathan Pugh and David Chandler (2023), _The World as Abyss: The Caribbean and Critical Thought in the Anthropocene_ (London: University of Westminster Press), p. 6
[^5]: Jonathan Pugh and David Chandler (2023), _The World as Abyss: The Caribbean and Critical Thought in the Anthropocene_ (London: University of Westminster Press), p. 10

