# Blue

Blueness is a truism of the environmental humanities. Attending to blueness is a mandate of mono- and inter-disciplinary treatments of socio-natural sites and interactions. It overcomes the historical monopoly of green over the humanistic study of the environment.[^1] Thinking with the registers and vocabularies of waters—coastal, oceanic, lacustrine, fluvial, static—are inescapable, plural, rich and well covered by environmental literature. Within the environmental humanities the blue waits, encapsulated. It is a different register of the environmental and the Anthropocene, and is itself finely delineated into registers of aquatic worlds, stories and interactions. Deep mapping, like water, is protean and unstable, but can make sense of the world. A temporary, mutating, pluripotent, ever-inchoate and free-form sense, but a powerful one.

.ve-media https://iiif.europeana.eu/presentation/89/item_FLYFT5KATHL5UNKSHV5UY6DP5OSUBZNA/manifest width=70% center

The goal of this book is to capture the interplay of blues within the blue humanities, suggest that some spaces themes and registers get comparatively more attention, and suggest ways in which spatial and digital modes of cultural heritage curation and narrative can create a more expansive vision of the field fit for the complexities of the Anthropocene. Blueness and aquatic subject matter—like depth, mapping, curation and disciplinary synthesis—is customizable, flexible, inexhaustible and prismatic. Singular interpretations of taxonomic lists of properties and typologies cannot capture water, and water cannot be captures by thinking in terms of any one part of the hydrological cycle. Its social appendages, arrangements and practices emerge over _longue durée_ time, sharply differentiated by the internal heterogeneity of waters, knowledges and mentalities.

As is the case with deep mapping, the blue humanities pushes back against neat, complete, exhaustive visions of its nature. Deep blue—the vision at the heart of their synthesis—is always more than is visible above the surface. Like a subconscious, knowledge is archived within water in an incomplete, inconsistently accessible manner. Humanistic explorations of water hold too many disciplines and approaches within them for that. The source material does not support it. Watery narratives support layer upon layer of stories, century upon century of crossings and lives, overlap upon overlap of perspectives. Embracing rather than retreating from this truth allows rigorously curated chaos, choreographed spontaneity and pluripotent meaning. Blues reflect more blues, and water is never a clear mirror or transparent medium.

Telling a digital water story requires the storyteller to be comfortable with the modes of digital presentation at their disposal, their assumptions, limitations and disciplinary epistemes, and the often subtle effects of mixing methods. This task is complicated by the mercurial and changeable nature of water, its transactions and temporary assemblages with the cultural and technological, and the plethora of ‘waters’ that exist both materially and conceptually. Telling a story of water requires a refusal to accept finite and bounded conditions of narrative. Deep mapping requires the same. The two are natural allies, and their intertwined histories make for productive analysis.

The overall thesis of this book is that creating a route that joins water into narratives is possible, but that doing so requires the embrace the impossibility of authoritative or conclusive stories. Flexibility and open-endedness result in a scheme or schemata that can move and flow with their subject matter, consolidating and curating concepts and material without overdetermining their meaning. By combining depths into a deep blue humanities mode of mapping, something experimental, anti-authoritarian, stubbornly granular and protean can emerge. No single method is sufficient, and yet many exemplars and inspirations exist. Conversely, depth and its essaying has much to learn from the pluriversal, multi-temporal and multi-cultural thought-worlds merged by the blue humanities. There is no one human imagination of the depths, and yet a Eurocentric abyss-fear lurks beyond the light, an otherworld that is antithetical to a status quo of empirical unilinear progress. The depths crush easy visions of their contents and castigate the positivist, waiting in excess of knowledge. The traditional of global blue humanities writing teaches us much about how a transdisciplinary eye and corresponding methodologies might uncover an excess that is nevertheless instructive and nourishing.

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Blue)

[^1]: Jeffrey Jerome Cohen (ed), _Prismatic Ecology: Ecotheory beyond Green_ (University of Minnesota Press, 2013)
