.ve-style ../custom.css

# Knowing

There is an increasing impetus to sense and to know the ocean, from its surface to its depths. Every contour, every process, every crisis, every interconnection for good or ill. As remote sensing and bathymetry become ever more sophisticated, this becomes ever more plausible. And yet, despite advances, there is always a process of storytelling, of imagination, involved in the process of mapping. The UN Sustainable Development Goal #14 demands that humanity "conserve and sustainably use the ocean, seas and marine resources", and to do so one must know what one is conserving and using.[^1] As a result, initiatives such as the The Nippon Foundation and General Bathymetry Chart of the Ocean (GEBCO) Seabed 2030 project seek to know the ocean in order to sustainably develop it. The European Union seeks create a perfect digital twin of the ocean, to "model the ocean's multiple components, provide knowledge and understanding of the past and present and create trustable predictions of its future behaviour."[^2]

To *use* a thing, one must *know* a thing. It is hard to imagine a more positivist and scientist proposition. Mysteries are an inherent evil, obscurity generates the woes of the modern world. If we could know more, faster, and better, we could master our destinies. It is undeniable that more is, can, and will be known about the depths of the ocean than at any other time in human history, but will this truly erase ambiguity? Steve Mentz, blue humanities scholar and author of *At the Bottom of Shakespeare's Ocean* might point out that anything exposed to the strangeness and depth of the ocean - be it technology, computer-aided vision of human beings protected by submersible shells - is destined to suffer a sea change.[^3] The depths of deep mapping are inherently plural, inherently rich and inherently strange. Knowing or seeing quantitatively *more* about them will not inevitable result in understanding more about them. 

>Depending on the layers, the depth and quality of the data, and the responsiveness of the deep map to user interests, conflicting interpretations easily might arise. Such conflicts then complicate the status of a deep map itself as an argument. But like scientific experiments that sometimes end in findings that support differing interpretations, a deep map is a scholarly product. Its scholarship in such a case is not located in its capability to mount a direct challenge to a specific interpretation, but rather in its capability to generate competing interpretations or auxiliary theories.[^4]

What lies at the heart of a push to sense the ocean? An unease about the consequences of ignorance, certainly. But there is more, a fear that the solutions on offer require more data than is currently available, that the boasts of nature-based solutions do not match the required input. An anxiety that the task of knowing a place and space that has defied conventional scientific knowledge will surface the processes and forces that will end human life on Earth as we know it. The ocean cannot hide the sins of industrialization, cannot do more than defer the problems of climate crisis. Only be knowing what the darkness hides is there any hope. And yet, despite these goals, is it possible to understand what is sensed in a meaningful way? Will understanding the ocean's depth result in progress without a corresponding shift in worldview and the incorporation of existing knowledges that might offer other solutions? 

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Knowing)

[^1]: UN Sustainable Development Goal #14m Life Below Water, https://www.globalgoals.org/goals/14-life-below-water/
[^2]: The Nippon Foundation and General Bathymetry Chart of the Ocean (GEBCO) Seabed 2030 project, https://www.gebco.net/
[^3]: Steve Mentz, _At the Bottom of Shakespeare’s Ocean_ (Continuum, 2009)
[^4]: John Corrigan. ‘The Inexactitude of Science: Deep Mapping and Scholarship’. In _Making Deep Maps_. Routledge, 2021, 162-174, here p. 168