.ve-style ../custom.css

# Frontier

Seminal political science fiction such as Kim Stanley Robinson's Mars trilogy teach us that humans travelling to a new planet makes nothing about humanity new. Those with a capitalist mindset will seek to capitalise, and those with a socialist mindset will plan experiments in community and wealth distribution. As this book discusses elsewhere, we run the profound risk that our ocean depths are to be plundered for mineral resources, as are the poles and areas previously marked as protected.

This book has primarily focused on the depths of Earth's oceans, and yet a solar system of oceans, and entire planets, wait exploitation at a time when the world's richest man clearly has designs on both controlling space and escaping the consequences of the chaos wrought by his oligarchic brethren here on Earth. In the future we will need xenoecocriticism, radical xenogeography, and deep maps of new worlds. The process is already beginning: ecocriticism and the environmental humanities are keenly attuned to space, and will continue to be even more so as time advances.

This book presents an ideal opportunity to speculate about what both new attention on extraterrestrial spaces and new means to reach them could mean. In this respect, the ocean is a perfect analogy. Will humans be living in domed cities on the bottom of the ocean? Maybe not. This is not SeaQuest DSV, a popular 90s television show imagining this scenario. Will humans send drones and automated mining rigs to these spaces and strip mine them, safely out of sight and scrutiny. Without push-back, definitely. Will humans live in space in the coming decades? Possibly. Will humans discover that sending autonomous drones to planets and asteroids for mining operations is profitable as terrestrial resources dwindle? Also very possible.

The solar system will meet the same fate as the oceans without critical awareness, and human bodies cannot visit these places en masse to bear witness or protest. The two examples are disturbingly cognate and of vital importance.

What will happen when all of the secrets of the ocean need are unearthed? When the obscuring penumbra of water disappears and the machine eyes of humanity can see what lies there? There is a very real possibility that it will be simply more of the same: a barren necroregion stifled, boiled and acidified into nothingness by anthropogenic climate change. The romance of a strange dark hidden world dissolved for a disappointing garbage patch of waste and folly.

How much of the desire to reveal depth is based on hubristic notions of ownership? Not just resources and infrastructure, but ownership of what is permitted to be a mystery. Mysteries are dangerous and the rising ocean is certainly dangerous, both physically as they errode and immerse and epistemically as they challenge a comprehensive tech-driven solution to global heating. What is laid bare by bathymetry and remote sensing is not only a lacuna but a chastening source of perspective. Many cultures are content to tell stories of an otherworld beneath the ocean, part of the same thought world and yet apart. The ability, however limited, to where this world and to take the surface with us has thrilled oceanographers.

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Frontier)