.ve-style ../custom.css

# Dread

This is a particularly acute problem in the age of big data, when any fearful thing could lurk in the data if it could only be analysed. Anything that we fear to be true about the life of humanity on this planet exists beneath the surface of data, a monster of our own making and yet outside our control. Hyperobjects such as climate change account for the groundless anxiety and grief of the Anthropocene: they lurk, vaster than knowledge and bigger than the actions we put in place to address them. Something could always be 'coming to get us': the next global pandemic, the rise of the oceans, the distant Bennu asteroid, a solar flare, and the data might contain the clues. But we simply cannot know, for it is beyond us. In this race, we resort to AI, parallels processing, quantum computing, modelling. Science and engineering seeks a faculty for mapping that is big and powerful enough to absorb the entirety of Newton's ocean - and the literal ocean - and to see everything within it. To sense all, and to know all. 

.ve-media https://gallica.bnf.fr/iiif/ark:/12148/btv1b84513728/manifest.json width=80% center

Deep mapping is a perfect expression of the positive and negative emotional valences of deep data. It is rich and sumptuous in detail, deep and not superficial. It hints at exciting detail and intricacy beyond a first glance. Its internal heterogeneity, ontological flatness and complexity create a frisson of excitement. There is also an element of dread to the depth of a deep map, especially to the quantitatively minded. It is the messiest and scrappiest expression of dirty humanities data. There is a reason why lovers of the inchoate and creatively plural—artists, poets, literary critics—are drawn to the deep map. It is profound and exciting. To those who wish to make data orderly and useful, deep maps are a nightmare. They are always already incomplete, treat ends with contempt, scoff at authority and refuse regimes of consistent navigation.

<br><div align="center"><iframe src="https://archive.org/embed/arcade_sharkatt" width="560" height="384" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" allowfullscreen></iframe></div><br>

The abyss yawns and embracing it and the realities of the abyssal present is the next great journey for humanity. It will lead us beyond the bounds of the Earth into the second abyss of space, but also forces a confrontation of what has taken place at home on earth. We dread what we might find beneath the surface or beyond the solar system, but exploring its incomplete picture is a cathartic and productive process. Becoming reacquainted with our smallness and shallowness and weakness and time-boundedness has become a lifelong lesson as we come into contact with forces and traumas beyond our individual ability to comprehend.

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Dread)