# Fading

The fading and attenuation of the bright busy surface world moves through a gradient of terror and anxiety, a clinamen along which thoughts and perceptions flow. As what can be seen lessens and what can be imagined grows, the view from the surface recedes. What, then, remains? A world of lightlessness that is not dark, a world of cold that contains warmth. A place that is dead filled with life. A place that is as rich with human and non-human history as the surface, and yet hides behind a hyper-objective absence. As the myth of the dark and the fear of an empirically-minded Western positivism gives way to a reality of dynamic colour and stories depth, we move with it.

>... A violet-black abyssal ecology is not a single hue but is instead pop­ulated with a spectrum of colors extending across the range of what is humanly visible and beyond. A veritable constellation of creatures who create their own light supplants a terrestrial, heliocentric model of sover­eign, unitary, human (or divine) knowledge. Prismatic, fluid constellations of bioluminescent animals in the violet-black abyss experience a world where the Copernican revolution is irrelevant. (Even the "fact" that all life depends on the sun, which most of us learned in elementary school, is no longer quite true, as chemosynthesis in marine vent ecologies does not depend on photosynthesis.)[^1]

As we move beyond the oppressive illumination of the sun and its ordering regime upon terrestrial life, we retreat from a view from above looking down into the void, and into a space with its own rules, its own ecologies, and its own presences. In the glittering reaches of bioluminescence and the bubbling vents of the ruptures Earth, we find light and energy beyond that given by far away light of Sol. As we move beyond the reach of plumb line, depth charge, diving suit or the majority of submersibles, we enter into a relationship with a place is beyond many things that are surface norms, and yet full of a richness and deep mapping narrative thickness that we now explore. What happens at the fading of the light and the extreme testing of manmade technologies, at which humanity must resort to remote sensing methods? The withdrawal of a vast thing does not mean that it has recoiled and vanished, simply that data does not provide access to the essence of it.

>It’s a common and understandable mistake to visualize something when you hear the word ‘withdraw.’ What you visualize is something shrinking back or disappearing. That’s not what the word means. What the word means is that no matter how you try to access a thing, all you ever get is thing data.[^2]

[Link to section](https://www.juncture-digital.org/deepmapsbluehumanities/Deep-Maps-Blue-Humanities/Fading)

[^1]: Alaimo, Stacy. ‘Violet-Black’. In _Prismatic Ecology: Ecotheory beyond Green_, edited by Lawrence Buell and Jeffrey Jerome Cohen, 0. University of Minnesota Press, 2013, p. 245.
[^2]: Anthropocenes – Human, Inhuman. ‘Hyperobjects, Hyposubjects and Solidarity in the Anthropocene: _Anthropocenes_ Interview with Timothy Morton and Dominic Boyer’. _Anthropocenes – Human, Inhuman, Posthuman_ 1, no. 1 (27 May 2020): 10, p. 2.